So first thing, of course,
is you need to load the dplyr package.
And you'll get some warning messages as
you load the dplyr package but but you,
because there are other functions
that have the same name.
But you don't have to worry about that for
the moment.
So, the first function we'll talk
about is the select function.
And so, I'm going to use a sample
data set here that you can
download from the web site.
And so I'm going to load it here.
And it's, it's a data set on air,
kind of air pollution and temperature.
And sorry, air pollution and weather
variables in the city of Chicago for
the years 1987 to 2005, and
it's kind of daily data.
So if you take a look at the dimensions
of the data set you'll see
that there are 60,940 rows and eight
columns, and here are the first couple of
rows of the data of the data set and
the first five columns.
Now one of the things you can do for
any data frame is to look at the names,
of the variable names
using the names function.
So, here I'm going to print out
the first few var, variable names.
And one of the nice things you can do
with the select function in dplyr is to
actually access the columns or
set of columns.
In the data frame using the names rather
than the, the indices into the column.
So here I, let's say if I want to look
at the columns starting with city and
ending with D DPTP,
which is the dew point column.
I, and I want to include
all the columns in between.
I can just say, I can use this notation,
which is city colon DBTP.
Which is not a notation that you can that
you would normally be able to use in
other functions but you can use here in
the select function and you can see it
selects all the columns between the city
column and the dew point column.
So it's a nice and
handy way to look at subsets of columns or
data frame by just you referring
to them by their names.
Similarly you can use the minus
sign to say, I want to look at
all the columns except for these, the,
the columns indicated by this range.
And you can use the select function to
just say minus on that city colon dew
point sequence.
And you'll get all of the columns,
except those few columns.
So, the equivalent code to do this
in kind of regular R, without
using the deplyr package is a little bit
tricky because you have to find, you know,
the index for where the city column is and
you have to find the index for where
the dew point column is and then you need
to take the negative of those indices.
So, it's not particularly complicated but
it's an extra two lines of code and
perhaps not as readable.
The filter function is the next function
in deplyr that we'll talk about and
it's basically used subset
rows based on conditions.
So, for example, you might want to take
all the rows in the Chicago data set
where pm 2.5 is greater than 30, so
I've got that condition here as the second
argument, and so that just creates a
logical sequence and it subsets the rows.
In the Chicago data frame based
on that sequence and you can see,
we can see the first few rows
here that I printed out.
All of the values of pm2.5
are greater than 30.
But you don't have, you don't have to just
subset rows based on values in one column.
You could take multiple columns and create
a more complicated logical sequence.
So here I'm looking at
pm2.5 greater than 30.
As well as temperature greater than 80.
I can see that now in this,
when I list, when I print out
the few first couple rows here, all of the
temperature values are greater than 80 and
all the pm2.5 values are greater than 30.
So you can have an arbitrarily complex
logical sequence there, and it will set,
and filter function will subset the rows.
Based on that sequence.
And again, the nice thing about this
function, just like with select,
is that you can refer to the variable
names directly using their names and
you don't have to kind of subset each,
out each variable using these,
using the various subset operators.
The next function of range
has a simple purpose.
It's basically used to reorder
the rows of a data frame based on
the values of a column.
And this is something that can be kind
of a pain in the neck to do in R and
the range function makes it quite
a bit simpler and easier to read.
So here, this example is very simple.
I just want to arrange.
When I order the, rows by data frame
according to the date variables.
I want the date variables above,
kind of the lowest date to be on top, and
the highest date to be, or
the latest date to be on the bottom.
So I arrange the Chicago data set to,
by the date variable.
And you can see that the first
couple of rows, start in 1987.
And then when I use the tail function
to look at the last couple rows,
you see that they all end in 2005.
So the const, the data set is
ordered now according to the date.
Now of course, we might want to also,
for example, arrange the rows in
descending order, so the desc, function,
or the d-e-s-c indicator, it can be used.
In the arrange functions to say you want
to sort the rows in descending order of
date in this case.
You can see now when I print
out the first few rows a,
they start with all the values of 2005 and
go, and go backwards.
And the last few rows end in 1987.
So I've just reversed the order of all
the rows in the data frame according,
according to the date.
The rename function is very simple.
It just,
it can be used to rename a variable in R,
but actually this is
a surprisingly hard and
annoying thing to do in R if you
don't have a function like this.
And so here you can see that I,
I've got the, the,
the names of the variables here and
the pm2.5 variable is called pm25tmean2.
Which is a bit of a mouthful, and
I may want to simplify that,
maybe I just want to call it pm2.5.
similarly, the dew point
variable is called dptp,
which is not particularly, intuitive, so
I might want to rename that variable too.
So here, I just call the rename function,
again, I pass it a data frame.
And then I say, I want it,
I give it the new name, and I say
equals and then I give it the old name.
So now I want it to say
dew-point equals dptp.
And I give it pm2.5 equals pm25tmean2.
And that renames those two columns
in the data frame, and it,
and it leaves all the other
columns untouched.
So now when I print out the first
couple rows of this data frame you can
see that the dewpoint variable
is there properly named and
the pm25 variable there is properly named.
The mutate function is used to simply
transform existing variables or
to create new variables.
So here in this example I want to create
a new variable called pm25detrend.
And this is basically this, the pm2,
2.5 variable with the mean subtracted off.
So I want to kind of center the variable.
And so here I've just created this
new variable called pm25detrend and
I said equals pm2.5, sorry pm25
minus the mean of that variable.
And when I,
when I looked at the first couple rows of
the pm25 and the pm25detrend variable.
You can see that the pm25
variable's unchanged,
it's it's in micrograms per meter cubed.
But the pm25detrend variable is in, is, is
kind of a deviation from the mean and so
it will have kind of negative and
positive values.
So finally the group by
function allows you to kind of
essentially behind the scenes
split a data frame according to.
Certain categorical variables.
So in this example, what I'm going to
do is I'm going to create a temperature
category variable which will indicate
whether a given day was hot or
cold, depending on whether the temperature
was over 80 degrees or not.
So I create this factor
variable called tempcat, and
then I use the group by function to
create a new kind of data structure.
Based on the original data frame and
this tempcat variable.
And so I call that new data
structure hotcold, and
and you can see it look,
you can print it out here.
And it has a slightly different format.
So now I can use the summarize function,
and and being from the U.S., I
use the z spelling for summarize, but you
can also use the s spelling for summarize.
So I summarize the group,
this hot, cold object now.
Which has been split based on
the temperature category variable.
And I just want to, what I want to know
is what's the mean pm2.5 for both hot and
cold days.
What's the maximum ozone for
hot and cold days, and
what's the median nitrogen dioxide or
no2 for both hot and cold days.
And you can see here that if I just print
it, it prints out a little data frame.
That has the value, the levels of the 10th
cat variable which are cold, hot, and
NA so there are some missing values.
And it gives you the summary
statistics for pn2.5 and ozone and
no2 in each of those categories.
Now actually so there, there is
missing date in the pn2.5 variable so
I need to specify.
The na.rm equals true in order to get
some the means of those values but
the ignoring the missing values.
So now you can see that that pm2.5 is
tends to be lower when it's cold and
hi and higher when it's hot.
And so and
these are the summary statistics for
each of the pollutants in
these temperature categories.
I could also categorize the data set on,
on other variables so
for example I might want to do a summary
for each year in the data set.
And so I can create I can use the mutate
function to create a year variable.
Which is based on the date I can
extract the year information from
the date variable by using
the as.POSIXLt function.
And then I group by the Chicago
data set by year now instead of
previously we had this
temperature category.
And I can use the summarize
function in the same way.
And I get, now I get a summary for
each of the three different
pollutant variables for
each of the years in the data set.
And you can see that in, in general for
particularly, particularly for pm2.5,
there's a kind of a downward
trend over time, which is nice.
So, the dplyr package
implements a special operator.
That allows you to kind of chain
different operations together so
much like the way we did in the previous
kind of operations that I showed you.
[COUGH] And does it in a way that kind of
allows you to see what operations
are happening in a kind of readable way.
And so it's indicated by a percent symbol
and then the greater than symbol and
then the percent symbol.
And so I'll just call it
the pipeline operator for now.
And so the idea it that you
kind of take a data set and
you feed through a pipeline of
operations to create a new data set.
And so
here I've got the Chicago data set and
I want to mutate to create
a month variable because I
want to create a summary of each of
the pollutant variables by month.
And so I I create the month
variable with mutate and
then I want to take the output of mutate.
And then group by it.
Use according to this month variable.
And then I want to take
the output of group by and
then run it through summarize.
And so notice that when I call mutate,
group by and
summarize, you,
when I use the pipeline operator.
I don't have the specify the data
frame as the first argument.
Because that's kind of implied by
the use of the pipeline operator.
So you can skip that argument and
go directly to.
The operation that you are trying to
do with either the mutate, group by or
summarize functions.
So you can see that the output of this
long pipeline of, of operations is a,
is a data frame that shows you
the summary statistics of each of
the three pollutant variables by
each of the 12 months of the year.
So the pipeline operator is
a really handy tool because it
prevents you from having to kind of assign
a number of temporary variables that you
subsequently feed into another function,
and it allows you to kind of change
a bunch of operations in one sequence
that's both readable and and powerful.
So a couple other benefits just to,
to do dplyr,
use dplyr, is that that you can work
with other data frame backends so
this is just using
the default R implementation.
But for example, you can use
the data.table package which is for
designed for very large and fast tables.
Similarly the SQL interface or relational
databases via the DBI package can be used.
So if you had data stored in
a relational database you can
use all the same functions
in the dplyr package and
manipulate the data in either the
data.table object or a an SQL database.
And without having to relearn
a whole new set of tools.
So that's really handy
once you figured out,
once you've kind of gotten
fluent in dplyr package you can
translate those skills to other
database backends almost immediately.